--- PAGE 1 ---
A Note on Notes: Towards Scalable Anonymous
Payments via Evolving Nullifiers and Oblivious
Synchronization
Sean Bowe1 and Ian Miers 2
1 Zcashewillbefull@gmail.com
2 University of Marylandimiers@umd.edu
Abstract.Anonymous payment protocols based on Zerocash (IEEE
S&P 2014) have seen widespread deployment in decentralized cryptocur-
rencies, as have derivative protocols for private smart contracts. Despite
their strong privacy properties, these protocols have a fundamental scal-
ing limitation in that they require every consensus participant to main-
tain a perpetually growing set ofnullifiers— unlinkable revocation tokens
used to detect double-spending—which must be stored, queried and up-
dated by all validating nodes. This set grows linearly in the number of
historic transactions and cannot be discarded without the undesirable
effect of destroying unspent funds.
In this short note, we introduce a new technique that enables con-
tinual, permanent pruning of nullifiers by validators, without imposing
significant computation, bandwidth or latency overhead for users, and
without compromising privacy. Our main contribution is a general model
we calloblivious synchronizationwhereby users ask untrusted remote
services (which ingest and process the public ledger) to create succinct
proofs that coins are unspent and otherwise valid. Crucially, these ser-
vices are fully oblivious to their clients’ transaction details and cannot
link their clients to any transactions that ultimately appear on the pub-
lic ledger. Moreover, these services only keep ephemeral state per client
and users can freely switch between services without incurring redundant
computational effort.
1 Introduction
Anonymous payment protocols based on Zerocash [6] have seen widespread de-
ployment in cryptocurrencies and distributed ledger protocols including directly
in Zcash [11] and a number of follow on projects including Tornado.cash 1 [17],
Railgun [19], Ironfish [12], Nomada [4], PrivacyPools [18] and others. Unlike
many non-private payment schemes where transaction details are exposed pub-
licly, these protocols leverage zero-knowledge proofs (specifically zk-SNARKs)
1 While Tornado Cash had experimental support for full-fledged payments [20], its
core design is a hybrid. It combines the trustless zk-proof mixer concept from Zero-
cash’s predecessor, Zerocoin [15], with the SNARK and Merkle tree techniques from
Zerocash.

--- PAGE 2 ---
so that users canprovetheir transactions satisfy certain correctness criteria
without revealing details such as the identity of the sender, the recipient, or
the amount. These techniques have been extended to privacy preserving smart
contract systems both deployed and in active commercial development.
The general approach of Zerocash and related protocols is to first encapsulate
spendable value into units of account callednotes, each of which consists of a
numerical amount of funds (similar to a bank account balance), its owner’s
identity, and possibly some metadata. Payments are made via transactions that
consume existing notes and create new ones. For example, if Alice pays Bob$2,
a transaction might consume a note owned by Alice containing$10 and create
a new note owned by Bob for$2 and another owned by Alice for her remaining
$8 in “change”.
Unlike standard blockchains, where transaction data is public and checked
by validators, in Zerocash-derived systems all such details are private. Instead,
transactions include cryptographic commitments to new notes, a zero-knowledge
proof that the transaction is correct, and, crucially, anullifierto prevent double-
spending. To verify the transaction, validators verify the proof and check that
the nullifier is unique, which prevents a client from spending the same money
twice.
Valid transactions have their note commitments inserted into an accumu-
lator. Canonically in Zerocash, the accumulator is a Merkle tree, though we
will refer to it abstractly as other approaches are possible. The combination
of the nullifier and accumulator means that, in Zerocash-derived schemes, the
blockchain does not reveal when or how money moves in the system. In particu-
lar, a zero-knowledge proof alone is not sufficient. The proof can check operations
that manipulate the state of the system, but on its own, it cannot prevent replay
or forking of old states.
In more detail, the zero-knowedge proof can be viewed as a program that
checks that:
ExistenceNotes being spent are well-formed and commitments to them exist
somewhere within the global accumulator. The state of this accumulator
(e.g., the Merkle tree root) is a public input to the proof called theanchor,
but the actual witness for membership in this accumulator (e.g., Merkle
path) and the notes being spent are private information that is not revealed
by the proof.
AuthorizationThe client knows the secret keys corresponding to the identity
in the note or equivalently, that (ephemeral) key material located in the
transaction can be used to establish this authority.
Balance IntegrityThe total monetary value of the notes being created (and
any residual value used as a fee) must not exceed the total value of the notes
being spent, to prevent counterfeiting.
Nullifier CorrectnessThe nullifiers that appear in the transaction must be
computed correctly (and deterministically) based on the notes being spent.
Ideally, a nullifier is an output of a pseudo-random function applied to the
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
note and keyed on a secret known to the spender, though additional crypto-
graphic properties may be desired.
Abstractly, we can view transaction validation as two programs. One run by
the transaction author that performs local checks. And a second program that
performs global checks, run by the validators. To ensure the checks in the first
program are correct, clients produce a zero-knowledge proof. To ensure the checks
in the second program are correct, each validator executes that program. Accu-
mulators and nullifiers are a crucial communication boundary between those two
programs, through which the validators learn that the note being spent exists
and was not already spent, but do not learn the note’s (and hence the sender’s)
identity.
We note that this same approach, and the scaling limits we describe below,
also apply to privacy-preserving smart contract systems. However, in such sys-
tems, the specific “balance integrity” check is replaced by a more general execu-
tion kernel that verifies both arbitrary application logic and, crucially, facilitates
interaction between mutually distrusting applications. In particular, Zexe [8],
which introduced techniques for a full-fledged privacy-preserving smart contract
system with cross-contract calls. Derivatives of this approach are in commer-
cial deployment or under active commercial development by projects including
atleast Aleo [3], Aztec [5], and Miden [14].
1.1 Scaling Anonymous Payments
Zerocash-derived protocols depend, generically, on some consensus mechanism.
In cryptocurrency terms this may involve proof of work, proof of authority, or
proof of stake. In distributed systems terms, this is state-machine replication.
The validation logic for this state machine—verifying proofs and checking for
double-spent nullifiers—is relatively lightweight. This makes Zerocash schemes
far more scalable than smart contract systems like Ethereum, where validators
must re-execute every smart contract. And in Zexe, this holds even if we extend
the functionality to smart contracts, since validators need only verify a proof of
contract execution.
However, compared to simple, non-private payment systems like Bitcoin
(which only require checking a signature and TXO status), Zerocash introduces
two distinct scaling costs. The first is proof verification, which is far more expen-
sive than checking an ECDSA signature. This cost, however, can be amortized
away as individual transaction proofs can beaggregatedinto a single batch proof
(e.g., via recursive proofs). In the limit, the validation cost for an entire block
could be reduced to verifying just one proof.
The second (and more significant) cost is that validators must still track
nullifiers. The perpetually growing nullifier set is a major scaling bottleneck for
Zerocash-derived protocols as we scale beyond existing cryptocurrency appli-
cations since it grows linearly with the number of transactions that have ever
occurred. As an example, assume a transaction consumes two notes, revealing
two 32-byte nullifiers. At 100 transactions per second, the nullifier set would
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
grow by half a GB each day. At the transaction volumes for commercial pay-
ment systems like Visa, it would be considerably larger. 2
Nullifier data must be stored online and readily accessible to allow double-
spend checks. In contrast, in most other payment systems, transaction history
can be either offloaded from the hot path or simply stored in an archival node. As
such, it represents a unique scaling limitation for anonymous payment systems if
they are pushed well beyond current cryptocurrency scale or used in a centralized
e-cash setting to gain auditability.
The nullifier scaling challenge has been known since Zerocash’s publication.
And indeed, is not unique to Zerocash, but applies to both Zerocash-derived
private payment protocols and many privacy preserving smart contract systems
derived in follow up work [8; 13]. Various approaches have been discussed for
pruning the nullifier list. One simple approach is to expire both notes and nul-
lifiers once they are too old. 3 Unfortunately, users must move their funds into a
new note, once per window, or lose their funds. At very large scale, this process
might need to be done weekly or even daily depending on the minimum resources
required for a validator.
A more promising approach is modifying the zero-knowledge proof in a trans-
action to check if the note is already spent. In these proposals an accumulator
is provided for nullifiers, and the proof computes the nullifier and checks that
the nullifier is not already in the accumulator. Since blockchains are organized
into blocks, there is a clear boundary for past transactions. It is still necessary
to reveal the nullifier, as we must preventconcurrentdouble spends in the same
block, for which validators must still check for duplicates. And in practice, we
may make unspent proofs relative to an older block to increase stability.
Various proposals for handling the nullifier problem have been discussed, but
as far as we know most have not been formally written up, proposed or de-
ployed4. The most promising techniques we’re aware of essentially center around
the idea of periodically freezing the active nullifier set for an “epoch” of trans-
actions in the ledger, collecting it into an accumulator, and requiring users pro-
vide non-membership proofs for prior epochs when spending their notes. One
such proposal can be found here[1]. Unfortunately, this approach runs into a
frequently undiscussed challenge in scaling zerocash-like protocols: accumulator
updates.
2 Visa completed 322 billion transactions last year, giving about 10,000 transac-
tions per secondhttps://corporate.visa.com/content/dam/VCOM/corporate/
visa-perspectives/documents/about-visa-factsheet.pdfand claims capacity
for 65,000 TPS.
3 Since a nullifier spending a note appears after the note’s creation, we can safely
remove a nullifier if we also remove all notes created before its appearance.
4 Unfortunately there’ve been nearly a decade of such discussions by various folks in
forums, DMs, etc. Including abandoned proposals by the authors. Any list of such
cites would be incomplete and in fact almost certainly miss the origin of the ideas
by years.
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
1.2 The Tyranny of the Accumulator Update Equations
To prove membership or non-membership in an accumulator requires a witness
w(e.g., siblings on the path from leaf to root in a merkle tree). The challenge
in Zerocash-like payment systems is that this witness must be updated as notes
or nullifiers are added to the accumulator. As a result, naively, each client must
process every block of transactions in order to update their witnesses. At any
reasonable scale, this is cost prohibitive.
For membership proofs, once a client has an initial witness to their note’s
existence, updates to membership proofs can be batched, saving the client a con-
stant factor. However, for non-membership proofs, e.g., to prove that a nullifier
is not already spent, we run into an additional problem: clients cannot com-
pute the initial non-membership proof without access to the full nullifier history.
There are a variety of tricks to reduce this problem, but known lower bounds
for accumulators that make it difficult to eliminate [10].
A natural approach is to outsource this processing to a third party. However,
this raises privacy concerns, since the process of computing an accumulator wit-
ness (for membership of a note or non-membership of a nullifier) leaks exactly
the element the proof is for. In particular, a client outsourcing such operations
for multiple notes/nullifiers would link those notes together and reveal they are
owned by the same user. This is a fundamental privacy violation. And, especially
since these outsourcing nodes, in many deployment scenarios, would be volun-
teers or part of the cryptocurrency network itself, it represents a substantial
opportunity for surveillance, e.g, via a Sybil attack on the network.
1.3 A New Approach: Evolving Nullifiers
Scaling anonymous payments hinges on solving the nullifier problem, but existing
proposals face a critical flaw. They create an intractable dilemma by forcing a
choice between two non-starters: (a) requiring clients to download and store the
entire, ever-growing set of spent nullifiers just to prove their own is unspent, or
(b) a complete loss of privacy when outsourcing the generation of that proof.
Our approach resolves this conflict not by trying to fix the accumulator, but
by making the nullifier itself evolve over time, allowing old versions to be safely
revealed.
As a concrete example, assume the nullifier for preventing the double-spend
of a note is modified fromη←PRF(k note,ρ) toη e←PRF(k note,ρ||e) where
knote is a key bound to the note,ρis a nonce, andeis a monotonic counter
known as anepoch identifier. Without loss of generality, we will assume it is
incremented per block, though in practice we expect it to change less frequently.
eis revealed publicly in spends and validators enforce the epoch is current in
addition to the existing double-spend check.
Evolving nullifiers effectively divide the ledger into epochs. For any attempted
double-spend of a note twice (or more) in a single epoch, the existing double-
spend check by the validators suffices, since the same nullifier is deterministically
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
generated for all spends in an epoch and validators maintain a database of that
epoch’s spent nullifiers.
To prevent double-spending across epochs, we cannot rely on such a check
precisely because the nullifier changes. Instead, we must ensure that every previ-
ous version of the nullifier is also unspent. Revealing previous versions of the nul-
lifier would allow validators to check this in the clear, but then we are back to our
core scaling challenge: validators store all spent nullifiers for every epoch/block,
and now they need to perform more checks against it. Instead, we outsource
this check to an untrusted third partyoblivious syncing servicewho produces
anincremental unspent proofthat clients incorporate into their transactions.
Because nullifiers evolve and different versions are unlinkable, these old nullifiers
can safely be outsourced while the client maintains the latest nullifier(s).
Observe two key points about this incremental unspent proof. First, as the
name implies, it can be computed incrementally. Given a proof that previous
nullifier versions up to epochi−2 were unspent and a proof that the nullifier
version forη ei−1 is well-formed, we can create a new proof (via recursive proof
composition) that the nullifier for epochi−1 was also unspent. Second, this
proof requires no sensitive information from the client; its components are only
what the client would have revealedifthey had spent in epoche i−1. So each
incremental update to this proof can be computed by a completely untrusted
party.
Readers will note, however, that some care must be taken with regards to the
timing of user actions. The primary concern is that wallets hold multiple notes,
and thus may update their unspent proofs at the same (or correlated) time,
such as when first turned on after a period of inactivity, or charging on WiFi
at home. Transactions spending these notes to different parties could still be
linked together by their use of incremental unspent proofs that were computed
at correlated times. This is not a small problem; in fact, it would be fatal to
the entire approach. To preserve the privacy of Zerocash-derived schemes, it is
essential that the syncing service be incapable of distinguishing between trans-
actions they assisted with and ones they did not. This problem can be generally
addressed by re-randomizing the proof, as many recursive proof systems permit,
such as those involving accumulation schemes[9].
1.4 Beyond Simple Outsourcing: Batched Proofs and a Data
Availability Layer
Our evolving nullifier approach raises two interesting points. First, the possibility
of batching the incremental unspent proofs. Here, the synchronization service can
compute one proof for a batch of disparate transactions from different clients.
Various efficient batched non-membership proofs exist [7; 16] and there is the
possibility of co-designing a specific proof system and accumulator to improve
performance.
The second possibility is to build a form of data-availability (DA) layer [2]
for Zerocash-like protocols, allowing us to move beyond ad-hoc oblivious syncing
services. In particular, a DA layer would allow the network to still store old
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
nullifiers, avoiding a dependency on the goodwill or business interests of others,
without paying the high cost of forcing the main chain’s consensus nodes to store
it forever. Indeed, this is the general idea of a DA layer, which separates the job
of ordering transactions from the job of guaranteeing that the transaction data
is available for anyone who needs to check it.
This would leave us with a transaction layer, which executes transactions by
validating proofs (including the incremental unspent proofs of previous epochs)
and checks double spends for that epoch, and a separate data-availability layer
which stores the nullifier database for past epochs and operates oblivious syncing
services to help users make transactions.
These systems could readily be set up as a Proof-of-Stake (PoS) network
independent of the consensus mechanism for the underlying transaction layer
(which, e.g., in Zcash is Proof-of-Work). As the unspent nullifier list is simply
data, there is nothing special required of the DA layer.
The need for such a data availability layer is a direct function of epoch
length. With long epochs (e.g., years), a cryptocurrency ecosystem can perhaps
organically support this need through exchanges, wallet providers, and hobby-
ists running syncing services and storing nullifiers for past epochs. However, to
achieve a scale approaching that of traditional payment providers, epochs must
become much shorter—perhaps even as short as a single block. As the system
grows and scales, one could easily imagine a point where the historical nullifier
database grows so large that it can only be stored by a few highly centralized
providers, like major exchanges or wallet providers. This could introduce a crit-
ical point of failure, where the sudden shutdown of these services could render
the funds of all their dependent users unspendable, potentially permanently.
References
1.https://forum.aztec.network/t/global-state-epochs/2704
2. Al-Bassam, M.: Lazyledger: A distributed data availability ledger with client-side
smart contracts. CoRRabs/1905.09274(2019),http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.
09274
3. Aleo Team: Aleo: The Layer 1 for Private Applications.https://aleo.org/
4. Anoma Foundation: Namada: An L1 for Interchain Asset-Agnostic Privacy.https:
//namada.net/
5. Aztec Labs: Aztec: The Privacy-First L2 on Ethereum.https://aztec.network/
6. Ben Sasson, E., Chiesa, A., Garman, C., Green, M., Miers, I., Tromer,
E., Virza, M.: Zerocash: Decentralized anonymous payments from bitcoin.
In: 2014 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. pp. 459–474 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2014.36
7. Boneh, D., B¨ unz, B., Fisch, B.: Batching techniques for accumulators with appli-
cations to iops and stateless blockchains. In: Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO
2019: 39th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA,
August 18–22, 2019, Proceedings, Part I. p. 561–586. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Hei-
delberg (2019)
8. Bowe, S., Chiesa, A., Green, M., Miers, I., Mishra, P., Wu, H.: ZEXE: Enabling
decentralized private computation. In: 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Privacy, SP 2020, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 18-21, 2020. pp. 947–964. IEEE
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/SP40000.2020.00050,https://eprint.iacr.org/
2018/962
9. B¨ unz, B., Chiesa, A., Mishra, P., Spooner, N.: Proof-carrying data from accu-
mulation schemes. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2020/499 (2020),https:
//eprint.iacr.org/2020/499
10. Christ, M., Bonneau, J.: Limits on revocable proof systems, with applications to
stateless blockchains. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2022/1478 (2022),https:
//eprint.iacr.org/2022/1478
11. Company, E.C.: Zcash: Privacy-protecting digital currency,https://z.cash/
12. Iron Fish Team: Iron Fish: The Universal Privacy Layer for Web3.https :
//ironfish.network/
13. Kosba, A.E., Miller, A., Shi, E., Wen, Z., Papamanthou, C.: Hawk: The Blockchain
Model of Cryptography and Privacy-Preserving Smart Contracts. In: IEEE Sym-
posium on Security and Privacy, SP 2016, San Jose, CA, USA, May 22-26, 2016.
pp. 839–858 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2016.55,https://doi.org/10.
1109/SP.2016.55
14. Miden Team: Miden is the Edge Blockchain.https://miden.xyz/
15. Miers, I., Garman, C., Green, M., Rubin, A.D.: Zerocoin: Anonymous distributed
e-cash from bitcoin. In: Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy. pp. 397–411. SP ’13, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA
(2013),http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SP.2013.34
16. Ozdemir, A., Wahby, R., Whitehat, B., Boneh, D.: Scaling verifiable compu-
tation using efficient set accumulators. In: 29th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 20). pp. 2075–2092. USENIX Association (Aug 2020),https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/ozdemir
17. Pertsev, A., Semenov, R., Storm, R.: Tornado cash privacy solution version
1.4,https://berkeley-defi.github.io/assets/material/Tornado%20Cash%
20Whitepaper.pdf
18. Privacy Pools Team: Privacy Pools.https://privacypools.com/
19. RAILGUN Contributors: RAILGUN: Privacy System.https://railgun.org
20. Tornado.cash Team: Tornado.cash Nova.https://github.com/tornadocash/
tornado-nova
8

